Random123-Boost
===============

Proposed Random123 functions for Boost.Random

The purpose of this source tree is to develop a new family of
"Counter Based Uniform Random Number Engines" (CBENGs) for the
Boost.Random library.  CBENGs were introduced in the paper, "Parallel
Random Numbers -- As Easy as 1, 2, 3", by Salmon, Moraes, Dror & Shaw,
which won the Best Paper award at the SC'11  conference:

http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2063405
also available at
http://www.thesalmons.org/john/random123/papers/random123sc11.pdf

Conventional generators (such as those in Boost.Random or the C++11
<random> library) are large and difficult to initialize.  Boost's
documentation explicitly advises against frequent initialization, so
common practice is to serialize access through a single global
generator, or, in a parallel program, to instantiate one generator
per-thread.

Unlike conventional engines CBENGs require very little storage and are
designed to be created, destroyed and restarted frequently.  If
created and destroyed in an "inner loop", a good compiler can often
keep their state entirely in registers and can generate random values
with a few dozen inlined instructions.  In addition, they have
extremely fast, constant-time implementations of 'discard()', which
allows callers to easily "leapfrog" through a logical stream of random
numbers.  These features make them ideal for parallel computation.

Consider the following program fragment, using a conventional
RandomNumberEngine, mt19937:

    mt_19937 rng(seed); // seed may come from the command line
    normal_distribution nd;
    for(size_t i=0; i<Natoms; ++i){
        float boltzmannfactor = sqrt(kT/atoms[i].mass);
        atoms[i].vx = boltzmannfactor*nd(rng);
        atoms[i].vy = boltzmannfactor*nd(rng);
        atoms[i].vz = boltzmannfactor*nd(rng);
    }

Now imagine parallelizing this loop over a number of threads or cores.
The conventional approach is to create an independent generator in
each thread, perhaps folding a thread-id into the seed, or using a
'discard' function so that threads can "leapfrog" over one another.
But both these solutions result in output that depends on the number
of threads and how atoms are assigned to threads.  Furthermore,
improperly seeding millions of generators (not an unreasonable number
on a modern supercomputer) can lead to unintended correlations among
streams, so conventional wisdom is that one must very carefully choose
the engine and the initialization method.  The problem is even harder
if the overall program structure (i.e., not just this loop) dictates a
parallelization strategy that might assign the same atom to multiple
threads.

CBENGs overcome all these problems.  With CBENGs, the code looks like
this (see libs/random/examples/counter_based_example.cpp for a fully
worked example):

    typedef threefry<4, uint32_t> Prf;
    counter_based_engine<Prf, 32> cbeng(seed);
    for(size_t i=0; i<Natoms; ++i){
        float boltzmannfactor = sqrt(kT/atoms[i].mass);
        normal_distribution nd(0., rmsvelocity);
        Prf::domain_type base = {atoms[i].id, timestep, THERMALIZE_CTXT};
        cbeng.restart(base);
        atoms[i].vx = boltzmannfactor*nd(cbeng);
        atoms[i].vy = boltzmannfactor*nd(cbeng);
        atoms[i].vz = boltzmannfactor*nd(cbeng);
    }

Let's consider the code changes between the two fragments:

- counter_based_engine is a templated adapter class.  Its template
parameters are a Pseudo-Random Function (PRF) and the number of bits in
its 'counter'.

        typedef threefry<4, uint32_t> Prf;
        counter_based_engine<Prf, 32> cbeng(seed);

    The sequence length of counter_based_engine is governed by its
second template argument (in this case 32) and the number of random
values generated by each Prf "turn of the crank" (in this case 4, of
type uint32_t).  So this engine can generate "only" 4*2^32 random
values before it needs to be restart()-ed with a new 'base counter'
(see below).  Since we only use it to generate three normally
distributed values, there is no danger of exhausting the counter.
In fact, we could have gotten away with many fewer counter bits (4
would probably suffice).

    We restart the generator with a new base counter every time
through the loop.  In this example, the 'domain_type' of the
threefry<4, uint32_t> pseudo-random function is (as the template
arguments suggest) 128 bits wide.  We've allocated 32 "Counter Bits"
to the engine.  That leaves us with 96 bits to be managed as a 'base
counter', which is more than enough to create a new, unique base counter
every time through the loop:

         Prf::domain_type base = {atoms[i].id, timestep, THERMALIZE_CTXT};
         cbeng.restart(base);

    In C++11, with initializer-lists, this might be shortened to:

         cbeng.restart({atoms[i].id, timestep, THERMALIZE_CTXT});

    Counter_based_urngs restart()-ed or constructed from different
bases, even bases that differ in only a single bit, will generate
independent, non-overlapping sequences of random values.  Thus, by
choosing a value in the domain that encodes some program-specific
state (e.g., atoms[i].id and timestep), we produce a unique stream for
each atom at each timestep that is statistically independent of all
other streams.  The additional constant THERMALIZE_CTXT distinguishes
this loop from any other loop or context in the program, eliminating
the possibility that the same sequence will be generated elsewhere.

    Notice that the random values generated for a particular atom at a
particular timestep are independent of the number of threads, how they
are scheduled and the assignment of atoms to threads.




Pseudo-random functions:  Philox and Threefry
---------------------------------------------

Two Pseudo-Random functions are implemented in this source tree:
threefry and philox.  They are both described in the SC11 paper.  Both
are templated over an unsigned element-count, an unsigned integer
value type, and a round-count (which takes a reasonable and safe
default value).  For example:

     threefry<4, uint32_t>
     philox<2, uint64_t>

All PRFs have a key_type, a domain_type, and a range_type, all
of which are boost::arrays of the underlying value type.  I.e.,

     threefry<N, U>::key_type    = boost::array<U, N>
                   domain_type = boost::array<U, N>
                   range_type  = boost::array<U, N>

     philox<N, U>::key_type    = boost::array<U, N/2>
                   domain_type = boost::array<U, N>
                   range_type  = boost::array<U, N>
   
PRFs are keyed pseudo-random functions.  Two Prfs of the same type,
initialized with the same key are indistinguishable and two Prfs
initialized with different keys, even keys that differ in only a single
bit appear to be unrelated, statistically independent pseudo-random
functions.  Pseudo-random functions produce apparently random output simply by
"counting" through inputs in an perfectly regular way.  

The counter_based_engine conceptually maps 'seeds' to Prf keys and
then "counts" through the Prf's domain, generating random output in
the Prf's range.  Strong empirical evidence is presented in the SC11
paper for the statistical quality of the threefry and philox
functions. Among other things, threefry and philox pass the entire
BigCrush suite of tests and will not repeat over their entire domain,
of length 2^(N*sizeof(U)).  They are also very fast - 1.5-4 cycles per
output byte on modern CPUs.

For threefry and philox, initialization, i.e., re-keying or re-seeding
is also fast.  They can safely be initialized inside an inner loop.
For other PRFs, e.g., the cryptographic AES function (not
implemented), there may be non-trivial computation associated with
initialization, so initializing PRFs isn't always appropriate in
*inner* loops, but is perfectly reasonable at thread-scope or anywhere
else that a few dozen invocations of the generator will amortize the
initialization cost.

counter_based_engine
--------------------

The counter_based_engine class uses the pseudo-random property of PRFs
to generate random values meeting the requirements of a
UniformRandomNumberGenerator.  It reserves 'CounterBits' of
most-significant bits of the highest-index members of the domain_type
array for its own internal use as a "counter".

Whenever new random values are required, the counter bits are
incremented and the PRF is called, generating a new set of random
values that will be returned by counter_based_urng.  It is an error to
request random values after the counter bits are exhausted.  Thus,
the sequence length of a counter_based_engine is under programmer
control.  It can be as short as 2 or as long as the length of the
domain_type (up to 2^256 for the PRFs provided).

The remaining bits, i.e., the non-CounterBits are available to the
programmer to use as a 'base counter', which can be set via the
restart(Prf::domain_type) member function, via an overloaded
constructor, or via an overloaded seed() member function.  The base
counter allows the program to manage practially unlimited numbers (up
to 2^(256-CounterBits)) random sequences, each of length
2^CounterBits.  By logically associating independent random seqences
with distinct program elements (c.f., atom.id+thread, in the example
above), it's possible to write parallel programs whose output is
independent of thread scheduling or work assignment.

'Seeding' a counter_based_engine corresponds to 'keying' its
underlying Prf.  But note that the key space is typically much larger
than a single value of the engine's output_type.  So,
counter_based_engine has additional constructors that allow it to be
constructed or seeded from a value of the Prf's key_type or from
an existing Prf.  I.e.,

    counter_based_engine(Prf::key_type);
    counter_based_engine(const Prf&)

It is also possible to set the base_count at construction time:

    counter_based_engine(Prf::key_type, Prf::domain_type);
    counter_based_engine(const Prf&, Prf::domain_type);
  
And of course, there are corresponding overloads of seed():

    seed(Prf::key_type);
    seed(const Prf&);
    seed(Prf::key_type, Prf::domain_type);
    seed(const Prf&, Prf::domain_type);

To prevent collisions between counter_based_engines instantiated with
different values of CtrBits, the counter_based_engine reserves the top
few bits of the full key space to itself.  Attempting to set a key
(either with the constructor or with seed(key_type) that has non-zero
bits in the highest log_2(DomainBits) of its key will throw an
out_of_range exception.

Some performance-related features make counter_based_engines
particularly well-suited for parallel applications:

- they have very small memory footprint: Typically a domain_type (2-4
words), a range_type (2-4 words) a Prf (2-4 words) and an integer
index (one word).  Good compilers can often fit it all in registers,
especially if it has limited lifetime.  Thus, it can be beneficial to
create and destroy a CBENG as close as possible/convenient to the loop
that uses it.  The short lifetime may allow a good compiler to
optimize creation, use and destruction down to a handful of
instructions operating on a handful of temporary registers.

- restart() is little more than a fixed number of integer assignments.
It is very fast and highly amenable to optimization.  It is intended
for use in inner loops, near where the engine is used.

- discard() is also very fast and runs in constant time.  Parallel
programs can use this to "leapfrog" multiple sequences over one
another in different threads, or it can be used to initialize
generators in different threads with starting points that are
separated by enough to avoid overlap.  Parallelization strategies
based on discard() will generally prefer large value CtrBits, (128 or
more), allowing large jumps and long sequences without fear of
exhaustion.
